Core: Create technical proposal for Issue Timestamp in entities (#1562)
eclipse-dataspaceconnector/DataSpaceConnector: docs/developer/decision-records/2022-06-28-entities-timestamp/README.md

# Entities timestamp

## Decision

An entity represents any singular, identifiable and separate object inside an application.

The decision based on the definition explained above is to add a timestamp to the EDC entities in their state of
creation. These Entities are `ContractAgreement`, `ContractDefinition`, `PolicyDefinition`, and `Asset`.

The entity classes `ContractNegotiation` and `TransferProcess` will extend the `StatefulEntity` class. The other

> entities will extend the `Entity` class. the `Entity` class will take the attributes `id` and `createdTimestamp` from

Reviewer: I would use the refactoring ubiquitous language, saying that the superclass `Entity` is extracted from `StatefulEntity` and the fields `id` and `createdTimestamp` are pulled up to it.

`statefulEntity` and it will become its superclass.

## Rationale

> As it was already done with the entities which extended the `StatefulEntity` class, where the entities can store the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As it was already done with the entities which extended the `StatefulEntity` class, the entities can store the
```

timestamp of their creation and also the last change of state timestamp.

The idea of this change is to provide timestamps for creation of entities. This approach is similar to the entities that
are extended from the class `StatefulEntity`

## Approach

> Since some entities once are created, do not change their state, it is possible to differentiate them from the ones that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since some entities, once created, do not change their state, it is possible to differentiate them from the ones that
```

do it. This is the reason why an abstraction called `Entity` was extracted from the class `StatefulEntity`.

> The class Entity will contain 2 attributes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The class `Entity` will contain 2 attributes, `id` and `createdTimestamp`.
```

```java

public abstract class Entity<T extends Entity<T>> {

    protected String id;

>     protected long createdTimestamp;

Reviewer 2: I think calling it `created` would be sufficient

    protected Entity() {
    }

    ...
}    
```

> The class StatefulEntity will extend Entity

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The class `StatefulEntity` will extend `Entity`.
```

```java

> public abstract class StatefulEntity<T extends StatefulEntity<T>> extends Entity implements TraceCarrier {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
public abstract class StatefulEntity<T extends StatefulEntity<T>> extends Entity<T> implements TraceCarrier {
```

    ...
}

```

> The timestamp will be measured as epoch seconds, using systemDefault (UTC) as ZoneId.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The timestamp will be measured as epoch seconds, using `systemDefault` (UTC) as `ZoneId`.
```

> The timestamp will be measured as epoch seconds, using systemDefault (UTC) as ZoneId.

Reviewer: I'm pretty sure that the timestamp used in the EDC currently is in milliseconds, I would stick with that convention:
https://github.com/eclipse-dataspaceconnector/DataSpaceConnector/blob/16d8cdf7becddc141fd2e2ac8897a79f4d7e2281/spi/core-spi/src/main/java/org/eclipse/dataspaceconnector/spi/entity/StatefulEntity.java#L81

```java

> Clock clock=Clock.systemDefaultZone();

Reviewer: The `Clock` service is provided by the core of the EDC so it should be the only instance around, it's better to show that it can be injected and then used like
```
@Inject
private Clock clock;
```

```
var timestamp = clock.millis();
```

        var sample=clock.instant();
        var sampleSec=clock.instant().getEpochSecond();
```

> As it was explained in the **Decision** section, a class `Entity` will be the superclass of the class `StatefulEntity`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As it was explained in the [decision](#decision) section, a class `Entity` will be the superclass of the class `StatefulEntity`.
```

> This class will contain and `id` and a `timestamp` as attributes when the entity was created. The entity classes `Asset`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This class will contain and `id` and a `createdTtimestamp` as attributes when the entity was created. The entity classes `Asset`
```

        created_timestamp VARCHAR NOT NULL,
        selector_expression JSON NOT NULL,
        PRIMARY KEY(contract_definition_id)
        );
```

Class `contractDefinitionStatements`

```java

public interface ContractDefinitionStatements {
    ...

    default String getCreatedTimestamp() {
        return "created_timestamp";
    }
    ...

    String getFindByTimestamp();
}

```

`class BaseSqlDialectStatements`

```java

public class BaseSqlDialectStatements implements ContractDefinitionStatements {
...

    @Override
    public String getFindByTimestamp() {
        return format("SELECT * FROM %s WHERE %s > ? and %s < ?", getContractDefinitionTable(), getCreatedTimestamp());
    }

    @Override
    public String getInsertTemplate() {
        return format("INSERT INTO %s (%s, %s, %s, %s, %s) VALUES (?, ?, ?, ?, ?%s)",
                getContractDefinitionTable(),
                getIdColumn(),
                getAccessPolicyIdColumn(),
                getContractPolicyIdColumn(),
                getCreatedTimestamp(),
                getSelectorExpressionColumn(),
                getFormatAsJsonOperator());
    }    
    ...
}
```

> in the `Asset` class the attribute property_id(which is currently stored in the hashmap attribute properties)will be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the `Asset` class, the attribute `property_id` (which is currently stored in the hashmap attribute properties) will be
```

> replaced with the id from the extended class `Entity`.With this change we can also refactor the store for the class

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
replaced with the id from the extended class `Entity`. With this change we can also refactor the store for the class
```

> `Asset`,just like it was done with the classes `ContractNegotiation` and `TransferProcess.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Asset`, just like it was done with the classes `ContractNegotiation` and `TransferProcess.
```

# Entities timestamp

## Decision

> From the class `StatefulEntity`an abstract class called `Entity` will be extracted and become its superclass. Some

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From the class `StatefulEntity`, an abstract class called `Entity` will be extracted and become its superclass. Some
```

> entity classes created during the creation of policies and contracts will extend to this class `Entity`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
entity classes created during the creation of policies and contracts will extend this `Entity` class.
```

> The classes `TransferProcess` and `ContractNegotiation` will keep extended to the class `StatefulEntity` using all the
> inherited attributes from this one.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The classes `TransferProcess` and `ContractNegotiation` extend the `StatefulEntity` class.
```

> ## Rationale

Reviewer: I would add a little explanation of what an entity is, also a quote from the [DDD page of wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-driven_design#Kinds_of_models) would be enough:
> An entity is an object defined not by its attributes, but its identity.

Also a list of our current entities would be useful

> The idea of this change is to provide a history in time for entities once they are created. This approach is similar to

Reviewer 3: this is not a real history, just timestamps of creation and last update

the entities that are extended from the class 'StatefulEntity' where the entities can store the time of creation and
change of state timestamp.

## Approach

> As it was explained in the section Decision, a class `Entity` will be the superclass of the class `StatefulEntity`. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As it was explained in the **Decision** section, a class `Entity` will be the superclass of the class `StatefulEntity`. This
```

> class will contain as attributes and id and the timestamp when the entity was created. The entity classes `Asset`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
class will contain an `id` and a `timestamp` as attributes when the entity is created. The entity classes `Asset`,
```

> `ContractDefinition`, `PolicyDefinition` and `ContractAgreement` will extend to this class. Their SQL schemas will also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ContractDefinition`, `PolicyDefinition` and `ContractAgreement` will extend this class. Their SQL schemas will also
```

be modified, so that the timestamps can also be stored persistently.

> in the class `Asset` the attribute property_id (which is currently stored in the hashmap attribute properties) will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the `Asset` class the attribute property_id (which is currently stored in the hashmap attribute properties) will be
```

replaced with the id from the extended class `Entity`. With this change we can also refactor the store for the class
`Asset`, just like it was done with the classes `ContractNegotiation` and `TransferProcess`

> The class `Catalog` is not considered as an entity since it is not generated on a request, it does not count with an id,

Reviewer: I would avoid mentioning `Catalog`, as you said it's not an entity, so it's out of context here
